Dada is a new tendency in art. One can tell this from the fact that
until now nobody knew anything about it, and tomorrow everyone
in Zürich will be talking about it. Dada comes from the dictionary. It
is terribly simple. In French it means ‘hobby horse’. In German it
means ‘good-bye’, ‘Get o my back’, ‘Be seeing you sometime’. In
Romanian: ‘Yes, indeed, you are right, that’s it. But of course, yes,
denitely, right.’ And so forth. An international word. Just a word, and the word a movement.
Very easy to understand. Quite terribly simple. To make of it an
artistic tendency must mean that one is anticipating complications.
Dada psychology, dada Germany cum indigestion and fog paroxysm,
dada literature, dada bourgeoisie, and yourselves, honoured poets,
who are always writing with words but never writing the word
itself, who are always writing around the actual point. Dada world
war without end, dada revolution without beginning, dada, you
friends and also poets, esteemed sirs, manufacturers, and
evangelists. Dada Tzara, dada Huelsenbeck, dada m’dada, dada
m’dada dada mhm, dada dera dada, dada Hue, dada Tza. How does one achieve eternal bliss? By saying dada. How does
one become famous? By saying dada. With a noble gesture and
delicate propriety. Till one goes crazy. Till one loses consciousness.
How can one get rid of everything that smacks of journalism,
worms, everything nice and right, blinkered, moralistic,
europeanized, enervated? By saying dada. Dada is the world soul,
dada is the pawnshop. Dada is the world’s best lily-milk soap. Dada
Mr Rubiner, dada Mr Korrodi. Dada Mr Anastasius Lilienstein. In
plain language: the hospitality of the Swiss is something to be
profoundly appreciated. And in questions of aesthetics the key is
quality. I shall be reading poems that are meant to dispense with
conventional language, no less, and to have done with it. Dada
Johann Fuchsgang Goethe. Dada Stendhal. Dada Dalai Lama,
Buddha, Bible and Nietzsche. Dada m’dada. Dada mhm dada da. It’s
a question of connections, and of loosening them up a bit to start
with. I don’t want words that other people have invented. All the
words are other people’s inventions. I want my own stu, my own
rhythm, and vowels and consonants too, matching the rhythm and
all my own. If this pulsation is seven yards long, I want words for it
that are seven yards long. Mr Schulz’s words are only two and a half
centimetres long. It will serve to show how articulated language comes into being. I
let the vowels fool around. I let the vowels quite simply occur, as a
cat miaows … Words emerge, shoulders of words, legs, arms, hands
of words. Au, oi, uh. One shouldn’t let too many words out. A line of
poetry is a chance to get rid of all the lth that clings to this
accursed language, as if put there by stockbrokers’ hands, hands
worn smooth by coins. I want the word where it ends and begins.
Dada is the heart of words. Each thing has its word, but the word has become a thing by
itself. Why shouldn’t I nd it? Why can’t a tree be called Pluplusch,
and Pluplubasch when it has been raining? The word, the word, the
word outside your domain, your stuness, this laughable
impotence, your stupendous smugness, outside all the parrotry of
your self-evident limitedness. The word, gentlemen, is a public
concern of the rst importance.